Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Michael Whelan. He has to be recognized as
the hottest artist going in the science fiction and fantasy field. In the fall
of 1983, he won the latest of several Hugos he's garnered as the best artist
doing science fiction and fantasy work. We spoke with Whelan recently and asked
him when his interest in science fiction and fantasy art began. I think it
developed when I was born. My father's always worked in the space industry or in
the missiles and space industry. So I had that input around me. He had always
been reading science fiction since I was young. So I had the magazines around to
look at. Some of my earliest recollections are of looking at the covers of old
amazing stories, magazines, or paperback books. In fact, some of them influenced
me to a great deal. Before I could even read or write, I remember looking at
some of those covers for hours and absorbing the visual feeling of the
paintings. There were a few that were especially captivating for me. And I
remember them to this day, exactly what the paintings look like. And I could
describe to you the compositions and some of the colors of the paintings. And
it's a funny thing. At the last World Science Fiction Convention, I was walking
down by one of the dealer's tables in the dealer's room. And I just started
going through some of the paperback books. And I saw one of the covers that I
remembered from when I was three years old or whatever. It was interesting to me
because I hadn't been able, in retrospect, to pinpoint the exact time when I
started really being fascinated by science fiction imagery. And this book had
been published in 1952 or 1953. So being born in 1950, that pretty much
establishes the beginning of that at around three years old or so. But the fact
that it meant so much to me that I remembered that exact cover until my present
age says something about how I guess it was just a part of me that that kind of
imagery was important to me. But later when I began to read, I became an avid
reader of all types of literature, but especially science fiction and fantasy.
And I had an interest in art, so the two combined. And it seemed natural to me
to read and try to draw what I read. And I would come home sometimes from
science fiction movies or movies that I enjoyed and try to illustrate scenes
that I'd seen in the movie from memory. And that carried on pretty much right
into my college years.
In college, Whelan had no plans on becoming an artist. He was, in fact, a pre
-med student. In college, I had been laboring under the assumption that I had to
have a real type of profession. This is largely due to input from my parents,
but I felt that I had to. To be something professional like a lawyer, something
respectable, which being an artist isn't.
So I was diverted during my college years into wanting to become a doctor, which
is still a major interest of mine. Anatomy and physiology and the sciences in
general were always important to me. But about three quarters of the way through
my college education, I decided to abandon my pre-med training and go full
scale. Well, actually, it wasn't until my last year of college that I decided
full tilt to go into illustrating or painting. And I graduated with a degree in
painting. If I had taken one more course, I would have had a degree in biology
with an emphasis on anatomy and physiology, human anatomy and physiology. Whelan
pays special attention to the human form in his art. There's a reason for that.
One of the jobs I had when I was putting myself through college was working in
the anatomy and physiology labs at the university I went to preparing the
cadavers for the classes. And during that time, I managed to get some work in
doing medical illustrations. All this combined to really give me a good
fundamental education in the way the body is made up. More next time with
Michael Whelan.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Hugo Award-winning artist Michael Whelan
has always been a reader of science fiction and fantasy. His love of the field
inspires his work. Among other things, Whelan paints covers for science fiction
and fantasy books. He's the most successful artist in his field right now, and
if you read any science fiction at all, you've seen and admired one of his
covers. How does Whelan come up with an idea for a book cover? Say for his well
-known painting on Anne McCaffrey's The White Dragon. That's going back away. That's
back in 77 or 78 when I did that. Let me think. Well, I read the book one time,
just read it as a reader, so to speak. Then I go through it again the second
time as an illustrator, making notes and margins about details of the way people
and objects and things look, making sure that I try to catch all the details so
I don't make someone who's blonde, black-haired or whatever, you know, because I
like to be really true to the story as much as possible, especially if I'm
taking a narrative approach to doing an illustration. After going through it
that second time, I'll sit down and start to develop thumbnail sketches, which
are just small drawings on scrap paper, actually, and try to find an idea of
what I would like to illustrate from that book. There's usually something in any
book, no matter how bad or good, that will make a good painting. It's a matter
of digging through it and finding what it leads to you and what will motivate
you to do a really good job. So I go through it and try to collate all my
different ideas and put it together into a painting. That is the mysterious part
that I can't really describe to you, how that happens. I guess that's what makes
me what I am, is that process there of distilling what I've read into something
that's a visual image that captures what's in the book. But that process takes a
few days to do, and sometimes I get an instant image. The cover I just did for
Robert A. Heinlein's book, Friday, I had an instantaneous concept of what that
cover was going to look like. As soon as I finished reading the book the first
time, I had, I think, a perfectly clear idea of what Friday looked like. And I
knew that the cover to this book had to be a portrait of this character, because
the character had such, well, she had such personality that the book was written
around her personality, I think.
And if he ever gets any feedback from authors whose book covers he's done. Yes,
lots of times. In fact, with Friday, I got a phone call from Robert A. Heinlein
about a couple months after I turned in the painting to Ballantine Del Rey. They
sent him a cover proof, which is a first-run color tryout of what the cover's
going to look like. And he called me up to tell me it was the, it was a little
flattery, I guess. He told me it was the best cover he ever had on a book of
his, which is really quite a statement for someone who's been in the field as
long as he has. And to have an author tell me that I've captured a particular
character or scene exactly the way they had it in mind is probably, for me, the
highest praise that an illustrator can get. And that really had me floating up
by the ceiling for a couple weeks to think that he would bother to call me to
tell me that. But sometimes before I do a painting, I'll correspond with an
author or talk to him or her on the phone to establish certain details. With the
white dragon, for example, I talked to Anne McCaffrey at length about the actual
details of the dragons as she saw the dragons in her book, whether they had
forked tails or tails that ended in a point or whatever, or a barb or whatever,
and what their skin was like and what the texture was so that I could try to
capture her image of what they look like. It's kind of silly for someone who's
an illustrator to try to make all that up when you can contact the author and
get the details, if they're not in the book, straight from the person who
thought them up. We'll continue our conversation with Michael Whelan on our next
show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Multiple award-winning science fiction
artist Michael Whelan has done the cover art on many of the blockbusters in the
science fiction and fantasy field recently. The cover painting for Anne
McCaffrey's The White Dragon was probably his first well-known cover. Since then
he's done the art for Arthur Clarke's 2010: Odyssey Two, Robert Heinlein's Friday,
and Isaac Asimov's Foundation's Edge. We asked Whelan if he has a favorite type
of subject for his paintings. I think one thing that you can say about my work
is that I try to cover all the fields. And that's because it's all, I don't have
any particular favorite. I think I could say I have a favorite assignment each
year. There's one assignment I get every year that's the one I look forward to.
It's a regular thing now with DAW books, and that's the year's best horror
stories cover. It's a collection of horror stories, supposedly the year's best.
And I have completely free reign, like I often do with book covers, but
especially with this one.
And that's enjoyable to me. I like doing a good horror painting once in a while.
I'm not a person who's interested at all in blood and guts. That's not
necessarily what I, I equate that more with revulsion than I do with horror.
There's a difference. But that is a lot of fun, and I've enjoyed doing that
cover every year, that painting, I should say. I've come up with a few pretty
scary ideas that they've never let me paint, too. Someday that I'll do just for
myself. But, you know, that's only one aspect. I like, of course, the other
aspects of science fiction and fantasy. Also, I like to paint. I like the
exploration of space, what they call hardware paintings with spaceships and all
that. That's a lot of fun. I like to just kind of keep my fingers in all of it.
So I can't really say I have a, especially having a favorite, you know, field.
Horror is one of them, and that particular job is probably my favorite
assignment out of the year. But I can't say it's doing horror is something I
like to do over doing other things. We've all seen the gaudy and attention
-getting covers in science fiction and fantasy books. Maybe you've even been
influenced to buy a book because of its cover. We asked Whelan if a cover can
sell a science fiction book. I honestly don't know. I really don't know.
Sometimes I think it makes a big difference. Other times I don't. You know, the
fact that my career has gone where it has and that sometimes
I think it makes a big difference. The fact that I'm getting paid what I do and
everything to do these covers and that the publishers seem to think that my work
sells books over
just the title and the name of the author makes me think sometimes that the
artwork has a lot to do with that. There are other times when you'll see a
bestseller that has an absolutely wretched cover or has nothing but type on it
that's selling quite well. Then you think the cover art has absolutely nothing
to do with it. So it's really hard to say. It's a balance, I think, between how
famous the author is, how much publicity the book has gotten, and the
expectations
that people have had before the book's been published. A book like Foundation's
Edge, the Foundation series by Isaac Asimov has a large readership. They've been
waiting for this book and it's come out. So, you know, they could have put a
black cover with just the title Foundation's Edge on it and that thing would
have sold, you know, off the shelf. But just to be sure, they've hired me to do
the paperback cover for that book. But, you know,
books that have large, very large, that are published in large publications have
large budgets. And so they can afford to have a good cover for that. And I think
that's why it's true as, let's see, what's his name? The founder of Dell. His
last name is Dell Accord. I don't remember his first name. Anyway, he said, what
you do is, when you have a good painter, good cover artist, is use them for your
best books or your worst books. As the top cover artist working today, Whelan
gets a lot of both types.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Richard Curtis is a New York literary
agent who represents a number of today's most popular science fiction authors.
He also writes a column for Locus Magazine, the best-known publication in the
science fiction and fantasy field. The column is called Agent's Corner, and it's
full of advice for any kind of author, not just science fiction and fantasy
writers. We asked Curtis about the origin of his column. Well, about two and a
half years ago, I was invited to address a group of authors, the American
Society of Journalists and Authors. And I chose to talk to them about certain
contractual clauses that I thought might be pitfalls for most professional
authors. In the questioning that followed, I found an appalling ignorance on the
part of authors on the subject of contracts. And many of these people are highly
respected professional journalists and book authors. And yet it was clear to me
that they didn't know anything, or very much, I should say, about how to read a
contract, how to negotiate one, and how to alter a clause to their own benefit.
And so I decided to write a column for the many other writers who were probably
on the same position. And I asked Charles Brown, the editor of Locus, the
publisher of Locus, I guess, whether he'd be interested in publishing it. And he
was quite agreeable. And thereafter, a number of magazines, newsletters
published by other writers groups, such as Western Writers of America, Romance
Writers of America, Mystery Writers of America, took on the column because they
felt their authors were in the same position. We asked Curtis if he would mind
telling us some of the science fiction authors he represents. Well, no, I don't
mind at all. It's, I think, a fairly common knowledge in the science fiction
community. We represent Harlan Ellison, Gregory Benford, Greg Bear, Elizabeth
Lynn, Marta Randall, Barry Longyear, Warren Norwood, Jessica Salmonson, and I'd
say three or four more.
Since Curtis represents all sorts of authors who write for the paperbacks, we
asked him about the popularity of genre literature, such as Westerns, romances,
mysteries, science fiction, and so forth. The publishers, for instance, create
the market for these books and thereby, in a sense, determine readers' taste.
It's hard to say. Sometimes the publishers create the taste, and sometimes the
market, the consumer, creates the demand. Sometimes it's the agent. For
instance, I find myself very often in speaking to publishers, I find myself in a
double role. I keep my ears open and try to listen to what a publisher tells me
about what he's able to sell and what he's not able to sell. And so I have a
kind of passive role in that I pass along to authors what the publishers tell me
the market is doing. However, if I begin to notice a trend, I then try to help
create a market by turning to other publishers and saying, listen, I've had
lunch the last couple of months with four publishers, and they all tell me that
hard science fiction is not as active as fantasy and sword and sorcery, and so
maybe you'd be interested in some sort of sorcery. So an agent is in the
position of shaping the market once he begins to detect the trend. More next
time with Agent Richard Curtis.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Richard Curtis has been a literary agent
for over 25 years, and he represents some of today's most popular science
fiction and fantasy authors. He also writes a column in the science fiction
magazine Locus, which contains all sorts of practical advice for writers of any
genre. Many science fiction fans, of course, have often wondered if they could
make it as writers. We asked Curtis if he had any advice for aspiring science
fiction or fantasy authors. Always begin with the magazines. You're absolutely
right about science fiction fans being more fanatic, but they are also fortunate
in having a place where they can begin in the shorter media, where most writers
in other genres don't have the chance. I mean, there are very few places where a
romance writer can teethe. You know, you can't write romance short stories
unless you try to write for some of the slicker women's magazines, and they're,
of course, very demanding in what they accept. There used to be Western
magazines, many, many of them, but those, almost all of them, are gone now.
Mystery magazines, there are still a couple of them, but it's not like what it
used to be when I got into the business about 25 years ago. So one of the few
remaining genres that invites new talent and cultivates it is science fiction,
where you have very active magazine market and anthology market for original
stories. Besides this advice, Curtis says there's one particular aspect of
science fiction that can also help a beginning writer. You also have
conventions. Of course, Western writers, romance writers, mystery writers also
have their conventions, but certainly science fiction writers can out-convention
anybody by a ratio of 10 to 1. So there's a lot of interplay where authors are
always talking to one another, meeting editors, meeting professional writers,
and there's a much tighter unity than there is in any other genre. So I would
definitely advise any aspiring science fiction writer to start writing in the
magazines. In fact, even some of my well-known clients, I still tell them to
continue writing for science fiction magazines, even though they may get peanuts
for their work compared to what they can get writing books, because the exposure
among both science fiction editors and science fiction fans is terribly
important. Regular readers of science fiction and fantasy have certainly noticed
a great number of trilogies in the past few years. Right. It almost seems as if
authors plan on writing a three-book series when they begin a novel. We asked
Curtis if he, as an agent, liked to receive trilogies from his authors. The
beauty of a trilogy, of course, is, from an agent's viewpoint, is in the kind of
package deal that one can make, where you not only sign an author up for a book,
but you can sign him up for a sequel and a sequel after that. And the author
knows where he's going to be two years from now. The publisher knows what he can
expect over a couple of years. And unless the author one day runs out of steam
or gets bored with the characters that he developed in book one or two, you can
see a cumulative effect in the sales of a trilogy, where publication of book two
makes people scurry for book one, and publication of book three causes the
publisher to reissue books one and two, and then they put them in a box set, and
they're reviewed as a whole. It's a very nice way of publishing books, but not
everybody has a sequel in them.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.